Request/Response protocols and RTT
==================================

Redis is a TCP server using the client-server model and what is called a
*Request/Response* protocol.

This means that usually a request is accomplished with the following
steps:

-  The client sends a query to the server, and reads from the socket,
   usually in a blocking way, for the server response.
-  The server processes the command and sends the response back to the
   client.

So for instance a four commands sequence is something like this:

-  *Client:* INCR X
-  *Server:* 1
-  *Client:* INCR X
-  *Server:* 2
-  *Client:* INCR X
-  *Server:* 3
-  *Client:* INCR X
-  *Server:* 4

Clients and Servers are connected via a networking link. Such a link can
be very fast (a loopback interface) or very slow (a connection
established over the Internet with many hops between the two hosts).
Whatever the network latency is, there is a time for the packets to
travel from the client to the server, and back from the server to the
client to carry the reply.

This time is called RTT (Round Trip Time). It is very easy to see how
this can affect the performances when a client needs to perform many
requests in a row (for instance adding many elements to the same list,
or populating a database with many keys). For instance if the RTT time
is 250 milliseconds (in the case of a very slow link over the Internet),
even if the server is able to process 100k requests per second, we'll be
able to process at max four requests per second.

If the interface used is a loopback interface, the RTT is much shorter
(for instance my host reports 0,044 milliseconds pinging 127.0.0.1), but
it is still a lot if you need to perform many writes in a row.

Fortunately there is a way to improve this use cases.

Redis Pipelining
----------------

A Request/Response server can be implemented so that it is able to
process new requests even if the client didn't already read the old
responses. This way it is possible to send *multiple commands* to the
server without waiting for the replies at all, and finally read the
replies in a single step.

This is called pipelining, and is a technique widely in use since many
decades. For instance many POP3 protocol implementations already
supported this feature, dramatically speeding up the process of
downloading new emails from the server.

Redis supports pipelining since the very early days, so whatever version
you are running, you can use pipelining with Redis. This is an example
using the raw netcat utility:

::

    $ (echo -en "PING\r\nPING\r\nPING\r\n"; sleep 1) | nc localhost 6379
    +PONG
    +PONG
    +PONG

This time we are not paying the cost of RTT for every call, but just one
time for the three commands.

To be very explicit, with pipelining the order of operations of our very
first example will be the following:

-  *Client:* INCR X
-  *Client:* INCR X
-  *Client:* INCR X
-  *Client:* INCR X
-  *Server:* 1
-  *Server:* 2
-  *Server:* 3
-  *Server:* 4

**IMPORTANT NOTE**: while the client sends commands using pipelining,
the server will be forced to queue the replies, using memory. So if you
need to send many many commands with pipelining it's better to send this
commands up to a given reasonable number, for instance 10k commands,
read the replies, and send again other 10k commands and so forth. The
speed will be nearly the same, but the additional memory used will be at
max the amount needed to queue the replies for this 10k commands.

Some benchmark
--------------

In the following benchmark we'll use the Redis Ruby client, supporting
pipelining, to test the speed improvement due to pipelining:

::

    require 'rubygems'
    require 'redis'

    def bench(descr)
        start = Time.now
        yield
        puts "#{descr} #{Time.now-start} seconds"
    end

    def without_pipelining
        r = Redis.new
        10000.times {
            r.ping
        }
    end

    def with_pipelining
        r = Redis.new
        r.pipelined {
            10000.times {
                r.ping
            }
        }
    end

    bench("without pipelining") {
        without_pipelining
    }
    bench("with pipelining") {
        with_pipelining
    }

Running the above simple script will provide this figures in my Mac OS X
system, running over the loopback interface, where pipelining will
provide the smallest improvement as the RTT is already pretty low:

::

    without pipelining 1.185238 seconds
    with pipelining 0.250783 seconds

As you can see using pipelining we improved the transfer by a factor of
five.

Pipelining VS Scripting
-----------------------

Using `Redis scripting </commands/eval>`__ (available in Redis version
2.6 or greater) a number of use cases for pipelining can be addressed
more efficiently using scripts that perform a lot of the work needed
server side. A big advantage of scripting is that it is able to both
read and write data with minimal latency, making operations like *read,
compute, write* very fast (pipelining can't help in this scenario since
the client needs the reply of the read command before it can call the
write command).

Sometimes the application may also want to send ``EVAL`` or ``EVALSHA``
commands in a pipeline. This is entirely possible and Redis explicitly
supports it with the `SCRIPT
LOAD <http://redis.io/commands/script-load>`__ command (it guarantees
that ``EVALSHA`` can be called without the risk of failing).
